DRAFT: New Read the Docs tutorial, part I (#8428)
readthedocs/readthedocs.org: docs/tutorial/index.rst

Read the Docs tutorial
======================

In this tutorial you will create a documentation project on Read the Docs
by importing an Sphinx project from a GitHub repository,
tailor its configuration, and explore several useful features of the platform.

The tutorial is aimed at people interested in learning
how to use Read the Docs to host their documentation projects.
You will fork a fictional software library
similar to the one developed in the :doc:`official Sphinx tutorial <sphinx:tutorial/index>`.
No prior experience with Sphinx is required,

> and you can follow this tutorial without having done the Sphinx one.

Reviewer: This reads nicely, and gives the user somewhere to learn more if needed. Love it 💯

The only things you will need to follow the are
a web browser, an Internet connection, and a GitHub account
(you can `register for a free account <https://github.com/signup>`_ if you don't have one).
You will use Read the Docs Community, which means that the project will be public.

Getting started
---------------

Preparing your project on GitHub
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To start, `sign in to GitHub <https://github.com/login>`_
and navigate to `the tutorial GitHub template <https://github.com/astrojuanlu/tutorial-template/>`_,

> where you will see a green "Use this template" button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where you will see a green :guilabel:`Use this template` button.
```

Click it to open a new page that will ask you for some details:

> * Leave the default "Owner", or optionally change it if you desire.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Leave the default "Owner", or change it to something better for a tutorial project.
```

* Introduce an appropriate "Repository name", for example ``rtd-tutorial``.
* Make sure the project is "Public", rather than "Private".

> .. figure:: /_static/images/tutorial/github-template.png

Reviewer: Seems weird to have this figure when the content above is talking about a different page (the "Use this template" page)

Author: Woops, true. Will move it down.

which will generate a new repository on your personal account
(or the one of your choosing).
This is the repository you will import on Read the Docs,
and it contains the following files:

``README.rst``
  Basic description of the repository, you will leave it untouched.

``pyproject.toml``
  Python project metadata that makes it installable.
  Useful for automatic documentation generation from sources.

``lumache.py``
  Source code of the fictional Python library.

``docs/``
  Directory holding all the Sphinx documentation sources,
  including some required dependencies in ``docs/requirements.txt``,
  the Sphinx configuration ``docs/source/conf.py``,
  and the root document ``docs/source/index.rst`` written in reStructuredText.

Sign up for Read the Docs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To sign up for a Read the Docs account,
navigate to the `Sign Up page <https://readthedocs.org/accounts/signup/>`_
and choose the option "Sign up with GitHub".
On the authorization page, click the green "Authorize readthedocs" button.

.. figure:: /_static/images/tutorial/github-authorization.png
   :width: 60%
   :align: center
   :alt: GitHub authorization page

>    GitHub authorization page

Reviewer: I wonder if these would be better as short gifs showing the action, instead of a screenshot. The screenshots don't seem super useful to me in describing the actions required, but maybe I'm biased since I know the UX.

Author: Good idea, I will replace some of these screenshots by short gifs

Author: Added 1 GIF of the import workflow, the rest are obvious enough IMHO

.. note::

   Read the Docs needs elevated permissions to perform certain operations
   that ensure that the workflow is as smooth as possible,
   like installing webhooks.
   If you want to learn more,

>    check out :ref:`connected-accounts:permissions for connected accounts`.

Reviewer: 😢

After that, you will be redirected to Read the Docs,
where you will need to confirm your e-mail and username.

> Clicking the "Sign Up »" button will create your account

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clicking the :guilabel:`Sign Up »` button will create your account
```

> and redirect you to your *dashboard*.

Reviewer: We probably need a glossary for terms like dashboard & flyout. Might be a useful addition here or in a diff future PR.

Author: Yeah, I was thinking about it. Maybe it's a good moment to add it, I'll give this some thought

Author: Added a basic glossary, can be expanded but it's a start.

By now, you should have two email notifications:

* One from GitHub, telling you that "A third-party OAuth application ...
  was recently authorized to access your account". You don't need to do
  anything about it.
* Another one from Read the Docs, prompting you to "verify your email
  address". Click on the link to finalize the process.

Finally, you created your account on Read the Docs
and are ready to import your first project.

Welcome!

.. figure:: /_static/images/tutorial/rtd-empty-dashboard.png
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Read the Docs empty dashboard

   Read the Docs empty dashboard

.. note::

   Our commercial site offers some extra features,
   like support for private projects.

>    You can learn more about :doc:`our two different sites </choosing-a-site>`.

Reviewer: 💯

First steps
-----------

Importing the project to Read the Docs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To import your GitHub project to Read the Docs,
first click on the "Import a Project" button on your dashboard
(or browse to `the import page <https://readthedocs.org/dashboard/import/>`_ directly).
You should see your GitHub account under the "Filter repositories" list on the right.

> If the list of repositories is empty, click the "refreshing your accounts" link,

Reviewer: Probably another place to use the actual button image or copy. I _think_ this will work. 

```suggestion
If the list of repositories is empty, click the |:arrows_counterclockwise:| button,
```

and after that all your repositories will appear on the center.

.. figure:: /_static/images/tutorial/rtd-import-projects.png
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Import projects view

   Import projects view

Locate your ``rtd-tutorial`` project
(possibly clicking "next ››" at the bottom if you have several pages of projects),
and then click on the "+" button to the right of the name.
The next page will ask you to fill some details about your Read the Docs project:

Name
  The name of the project. It has to be unique across all the service,
  so it is better if you prepend your username,
  for example ``astrojuanlu-rtd-tutorial``.

Repository URL
  The URL that contains the sources. Leave the automatically filled value.

Repository type

>   Version control system used, leave it to "Git" (which should be the default).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Version control system used, leave it as "Git".
```

Default branch

>   Name of the default branch of the project, leave it to ``main``.

Reviewer: Are we sure it will be `main`? Is this configured in our template or on GH somewhere? 

```suggestion
  Name of the default branch of the project, leave it as ``main``.
```

Author: Yep, it's `main` in the repository itself, and so when the user "uses the template", the branch will also be called `main`. So happy that I don't need to juggle two possible branch names here 😄

Edit advanced project options
  Leave it unchecked, we will make some changes later.

> After hitting the "Next" button, you will be redirected to the project home.

Reviewer: Another :guilabel: needed. It could be useful to have `:guilabel:`'s for all the buttons the user needs to click, as a UX benefit.

Author: Good point, will give another pass at all the buttons

Author: Done

> You just created your first project on Read the Docs!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You just created your first project on Read the Docs! |:tada:|
```

.. figure:: /_static/images/tutorial/rtd-project-home.png
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Project home

   Project home

Checking the first build
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Read the Docs will try to build the documentation of your project
right after you create it.
To see the build logs,
click on the "Your documentation is building" link on the dashboard,
or alternatively navigate to the "Builds" page,
then open the one on top (the most recent one).

If the build has not finished yet by the time you open it,
you will see a spinner next to a "Installing" or "Building" indicator,
meaning that it is still in progress.

.. figure:: /_static/images/tutorial/rtd-first-successful-build.png
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: First successful documentation build

   First successful documentation build

When the build finishes, you will see a green "Build completed" indicator,
the completion date, the elapsed time,
and a link to see the corresponding documentation.
If you now click on "View docs", you will see your documentation live!

> .. figure:: /_static/images/tutorial/rtd-first-light.png

Reviewer: Wish the ad wasn't so prominent here, alas. Maybe a place to note Gold can remove ads?

Author: 👍🏽

   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: HTML documentation live on Read the Docs

   HTML documentation live on Read the Docs

Basic configuration changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> You can now proceed to make some basic configuration adjustments.
> For that, click on the "⚙ Admin" button, which will open the Settings page.

Reviewer: I think we need to tell them that this is on the project page. 

We should also clarify our language, is it `Admin` or `Settings`? 

```suggestion
You can now proceed to make some basic configuration adjustments.
Navigate back to the *project page* click on the "⚙ Admin" button, which will open the Settings page.
```

Author: Good point, will clarify

Author: > We should also clarify our language, is it Admin or Settings?

Admin has a Settings section, as well as Advanced Settings, Edit Versions... but there is no "Admin page" _per se_. Not sure how to reword this.

First of all, add the following text in the description:

    Lumache (/lu'make/) is a Python library for cooks and food lovers
    that creates recipes mixing random ingredients.

Then set the project homepage to ``https://world.openfoodfacts.org/``,
and write ``food, python`` in the list of tags.
All this information will be shown on your project home.

After that, configure your email so you get a notification if the build fails.
To do so, click on the "Notifications" link on the left,
type the email where you would like to get the notification,
and click the "Add" button.

> After that, your email will be shown under "Existing Notifications".

Reviewer: The UX on this page is so bad :( Really need to improve it.

Author: Yep, it's ugly 😓

Trigger a build from a pull request
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Read the Docs allows you to :doc:`trigger builds from GitHub pull requests </pull-requests>`
and gives you a preview of how the documentation would look like with those changes.

To enable that functionality, first click on the "Advanced Settings" link on the left
under the "⚙ Admin" menu, check the "Build pull requests for this project" checkbox,

> and click the "Save" button at the bottom of the page.

Reviewer: We should definitely make this easier to do :(

Author: Or evaluate the cost or make it opt-out? I hypothesize that most projects use only the default branch anyway (no extra $ on our side), and those who do use pull requests would really appreciate having this feature but they might not know about it.

Reviewer: Yea, I could be convinced, tho I worry it's the same as pdf/epub, where if it's on by default most users still won't use it (and might get annoyed by it). I think we need to promote it more, either way.

Next, navigate to your GitHub repository, locate the file ``docs/source/index.rst``,
and click on the pencil icon on the top-right with the tooltip "Edit this file"
to open a web editor (more information `on their documentation`__).

__  https://docs.github.com/en/github/managing-files-in-a-repository/managing-files-on-github/editing-files-in-your-repository

.. figure:: /_static/images/tutorial/gh-edit.png
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: File view on GitHub before launching the editor

   File view on GitHub before launching the editor

In the editor, add the following sentence to the file:

    Lumache has its documentation hosted on Read the Docs.

Write an appropriate commit message,
and choose the "Create a **new branch** for this commit and start a pull request" option,

> typing a sensible name for the new branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
typing a name for the new branch.
```

When you are done, click the green "Propose changes" button,
which will take you to the new pull request page,
and there click the "Create pull request" button below the description.

.. figure:: /_static/images/tutorial/gh-pr-build.png
   :width: 80%
   :align: center
   :alt: Read the Docs building the pull request from GitHub

   Read the Docs building the pull request from GitHub

After opening the pull request, a Read the Docs check will appear
indicating that it is building the documentation for that pull request.
If you click on the "Details" link while it is building,
you will access the build logs,
otherwise it will take you directly to the documentation.

> When you are satisfied, you can merge the pull request!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you are satisfied, you can merge the pull request!

That's the end of the tutorial for now,
but you can learn more about the platform starting with our :doc:`/features` page.
```

Read the Docs will try to build the documentation of your project
right after you create it.
To see the build logs,

> click on the "Your documentation is building" link on the project home,

Reviewer: This could link to the glossary definition. Hopefully w/ hoverxref it'll define it on hover 🤯

Author: Done!

   HTML documentation live on Read the Docs

.. note::

   If you don't see the ad, you might be using an ad blocker.
   Our Ethical Ads network respects your privacy, doesn't target you,
   and tries to be as unobstrusive as possible,
   so we would like to kindly ask you to :doc:`not block us </advertising/ad-blocking>` |:heart:|

>    Advertisement is one of our main sources of revenue.

Reviewer: I'd swap these two paragraphs. We don't want to lead w/ the ad blocking, people will stop reading if it doesn't apply to them.

Author: Good point, swapping 👍🏽

   If you want to learn more about how do we fund our operations
   and explore options to go ad-free,
   check out our `Sustainability page <https://readthedocs.org/sustainability/>`_.

Basic configuration changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can now proceed to make some basic configuration adjustments.

> Navigate back to the :term:`project page`

Reviewer: 💯

you will access the build logs,
otherwise it will take you directly to the documentation.
When you are satisfied, you can merge the pull request!

> That's the end of the tutorial for now,

Reviewer: `for now` feels weird, but I don't have a great suggestion.

Author: Let's just remove it?
